Add a script to start prometheus and grafana to follow a job allocation (#3648)
geopm/geopm: integration/grafana/README.md

# Grafana

This directory contains a JSON file for the GEOPM Grafana dashboard that

> visualizes metrics generated by the `geopmexporter(1)` Prometheus data source.

Reviewer: Minor suggestion:

```suggestion
This directory contains a Grafana dashboard configuration file to conveniently
visualize metrics generated by the `geopmexporter(1)` Prometheus data source.
```

Additionally the directory contains a script to enable the monitoring of jobs
launched using the PBS HPC resource manager.

## Importing the Grafana dashboard

Follow the steps documented in the official Grafana user guide on [importing
dashboards](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/dashboards/build-dashboards/import-dashboards)
to import the GEOPM Report JSON file in this directory.  This will enable the
visualization of data collected by the `geopmexporter(1)`.

> ## Data Source for the Visuals

Reviewer: Suggestion: put this section prior to `Importing the Grafana dashboard`

Grafana is capable of sourcing telemetry data from Prometheus clients running on
remote hosts. One such Prometheus exporter is the `geopmexporter(1)`

> <https://geopm.github.io/geopmexporter.1.html> which leverages

Reviewer: Suggestion: make the "geopmexporter(1)" text a link directly (as opposed to putting the link next to it)

```suggestion
remote hosts. One such Prometheus exporter is the [geopmexporter(1)](https://geopm.github.io/geopmexporter.1.html) which leverages
```

`geopm.stats.collector` to summarize the metrics. The dashboard file -
`GEOPM_Report.grafana.dashboard.json`, in this directory, relies on
`geopmexporter(1)` for its data source.

## Use case: Monitoring PBS jobs

The `geopmexporter(1)` is typically deployed system-wide with either a [systemd
service](https://geopm.github.io/geopmexporter.1.html#systemd-service) or as a
[kubernetes service](https://github.com/cmcantalupo/geopm/tree/prometheus/integration/k8#deploying-prometheus-client-in-kubernetes).
This documentation is for an alternative `geopmexporter(1)` deployment scenario
where an unprivileged user of a PBS managed system would like to monitor the

> compute resources granted to the user only while they are allocated.  This

Reviewer: Remove minor redundancy:

```suggestion
compute resources granted to the them only while they are allocated.  This
```

methodology should not be applied for system-wide monitoring by an
administrator, but rather for job monitoring by an end user of a PBS system

> where the geopmexporter is not deployed system-wide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where the `geopmexporter(1)` is not deployed system-wide.
```

> A script is provided called `pbs_prometheus_launch.py` that can be used to:

Reviewer: Minor suggestion:

```suggestion
To assist with this use case, a helper script is provided named `pbs_prometheus_launch.py`, which can be used to:
```

- Assist with the initial one-time configuration of the Grafana server
- Monitor jobs submitted to a PBS batch system
- Review data collected from previously monitored jobs

The script runs the Prometheus and Grafana server on the head node of a

> system. Optionally, the script may also deploy and connect to `geopmexporter(1)`

Reviewer: The way this is worded makes it sound like monitoring the nodes allocated to a user's job is a secondary purpose of the script, when actually, this is its main purpose. Given all the goals/functions of the script are already enumerated above, it seems the goal of this paragraph is just to mention the "how". A suggestion:

"To perform these functions, the script runs the Prometheus and Grafana servers on the head node of a system."

expanded archive is the `PROMETHEUS_DIR` provided to the
`pbs_prometheus_launch.py` script CLI.

Until the `geopmexporter(1)` is available in a stable release, the user must
build and install a development snapshot of GEOPM.

```bash
    # Install latest development snapshot of GEOPM
    GEOPM_PREFIX=... # target installation directory
    wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/geopm/geopm/refs/heads/dev/geopmdpy/install_user.sh
    chmod a+x install_user.sh
    ./install_user.sh --prefix=$GEOPM_PREFIX --enable-levelzero
```

### Configuring ports

There are three ports used by the script to communicate:

- Prometheus server port opened on the head node (default 9090)
- Grafana server port opened on the head node (default 3000)
- Prometheus client port opened on the allocated nodes (default 8000)

To avoid conflicts, or firewall limitations, the user may override the defaults
using command line arguments to pbs_prometheus_launch.py

### Configuring Grafana Server

Before deploying the GEOPM Prometheus exporter across the system for the first
time, the Grafana server needs to be configured on the head node by setting the

> administrator password and uploading the GEOPM Power Dashboard though the web

Reviewer: ```suggestion
administrator password and uploading the GEOPM Report Dashboard though the web
```

GUI.

To set the administrator password for your Grafana instance with the `grafana-cli`
tool run the following command inside of the Grafana software directory:

```bash
    cd $GRAFANA_DIR/

>      ./bin/grafana-cli admin reset-admin-password $GRAFANA_ADMIN_PASSWORD

Reviewer 2: We should probably suggest `--password-from-stdin` instead. Less chance that our docs get someone to accidentally leak their passwords to anyone monitoring command args.

```

To add the GEOPM Prometheus dashboard to your Grafana configuration the Grafana
and Prometheus servers must be running.  This is done by executing the

> `pbs_prometheus_launch.py` script without specifying the `--jobid` option.  This

Reviewer: Instead of or in addition to mentioning this, provide the invocation template:

`pbs_prometheus_launch.py PROMETHEUS_DIR GRAFANA_DIR`.

will bring up the Prometheus server and Grafana server on the head node.

Then navigate to the Grafana web GUI in a web browser to import the GEOPM
Dashboard.  The Grafana server will be running an http (not https) server on the

> head node URL on port 3000 (port can be modified with the the --graf-port option
> to `pbs_prometheus_launch.py`).  For example if the head node hostname is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
head node URL on port 3000 (or the port specified to `pbs_prometheus_launch.py`
via the `--graf-port` option). For example, if the head node hostname is
```

...or, as worded in the documentation below for adding the Prometheus data source

> `login.cluster.acme.com` then the Grafana server is reached through the URL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`login.cluster.acme.com`, then the Grafana server is reached through the URL
```

> `http://login.cluster.acme.com:3000`.  Login into the Grafana web page with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`http://login.cluster.acme.com:3000`.  Log in to the Grafana web page with the
```

`admin` user credentials set previously using the `grafana-cli` tool.  Once
logged in, add the http Prometheus data source using port 9090 (unless overridden

> with the --prom-port option to `pbs_prometheus_launch.py`),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with the `--prom-port` option to `pbs_prometheus_launch.py`),
```

e.g.`http://localhost:9090`.  Next, import the [GEOPM Power Report Grafana
dashboard configuration
file](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/geopm/geopm/refs/heads/dev/integration/grafana/GEOPM_Report.grafana.dashboard.json)
using the Prometheus data source by drag-and-drop or copy-paste.

### Monitor the user job using the GEOPM Prometheus & Grafana framework

Now that you have configured Grafana and Prometheus, you can launch the Prometheus
client exporters across the allocated nodes of a job, and then use the Grafana Web GUI

> (running on port `GRAFANA_SERVER_PORT` to monitor the aggregated telemetry.

Reviewer: Parenthesis not closed. However, this note might not be necessary since the documentation already explained previously how to reach the Grafana GUI. If included, I would recommend to not mention `GRAFANA_SERVER_PORT`, as this is not mentioned/defined anywhere. Instead, use similar wording as before (regarding default port and how to override it).

First submit a job to the PBS queue using qsub to obtain a PBS Job ID.  Use the
PBS Job ID (`JOBID`) of the submitted job when launching the servers:

```bash
    JOBID=$(qsub ...)
    ./pbs_prometheus_launch.py --geopm-prefix GEOPM_PREFIX --jobid JOBID PROMETHEUS_DIR GRAFANA_DIR

```

The script will print the path to three logs that can be used to monitor the
Grafana server, Prometheus server, and Prometheus clients.  The servers running
on the login node will be terminated by the script when the allocation

> completes.

Reviewer 2: Maybe specify whether the script blocks/runs in the foreground or if it launches some kind of background process (like non `-I` qsub does).

Author: I think this has been addressed...

### Review previously collected metrics

Simply run the `pbs_prometheus_launch.py` script without the `--jobid` option to

> enable review of previously collected metrics.  When review is complete, press

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
launch Grafana and Prometheus servers that present previously collected metrics.  When review is complete, press
```

And related question: What happens if `--jobid` points to an already finished job? Does it open review mode with a filter to show only that job? Or does it enter monitor mode and finish immediately? Or does it enter monitor mode and never finish because a job with that ID isn't likely to start any time soon?

Reviewer 2: Also what happens if `--jobid` points to a job that never runs? E.g., it gets held or canceled or errors out some time after queueing but before starting?

Also what if `--jobid` points to a job that already has a monitor set up?

And what if everything is good to go w.r.t. qsub and the job ID, but one or more of the components fails to fully launch? Do we clean up, or does the user need to do something?

I don't think we need to document every corner case here, but maybe just note the overall "what happens when something goes wrong" flow.

Author: Tried to address thies issues in the README.md

being monitored.
[C] Launch the prometheus server over a desired port over which the grafana server
is expected to query the aggregated metrics from.
[D] Configure the port number for the grafana server over which the end user is expected
to launch the web GUI.
[E] Set the grafana credentials using which the end user is expected to visualize the Web UI
[F] Download & import the grafana dashboard configuration file.
[G] Terminate the prometheus & grafana server processes, post configuration.

Steps-B through D can be achieved by using the `pbs_prometheus_launch.sh` script provided in
the sane directory as this README. 
```bash
    # First, identify the location of prometheus & grafana builds, the
    # preferred ports for their servers, and the grafana server admin password

    PROMETHEUS_DIR=...         # Path to prometheus build on head node
    PROMETHEUS_SERVER_PORT=... # Preferred port for the prometheus server
    GRAFANA_DIR=...            # Path to grafana build on head node
    GRAFANA_SERVER_PORT=...    # Preferred port for the grafana server

    # Next, use the launch script by passing the paths & ports identified

>     # in Step-1 as parameters

Reviewer 3: Where is step 1?  Was this supposed to be Step-B?

Reviewer 4: resolved

    cd $GEOPM_SRC/integration/grafana/
    ./pbs_prometheus_launch.sh $PROMETHEUS_DIR $PROMETHEUS_SERVER_PORT \
                               $GRAFANA_DIR $GRAFANA_SERVER_PORT
```

Step-E requires you to set the administrator password for your grafana 
instance with the `grafana-cli` tool.
```bash
    cd $GRAFANA_DIR/
     ./bin/grafana-cli admin reset-admin-password $GRAFANA_ADMIN_PASSWORD
```

Step-F requires you to download and import the grafana dashboard configuration
file using the Web UI. The dashboard configuration file is available here:
```bash
    wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/geopm/geopm/refs/heads/dev/integration/grafana/GEOPM_Report.grafana.dashboard.json
```
Import the GEOPM grafana dashboard with grafana web GUI running on
`http://SERVER_NAME:GRAFANA_SERVER_PORT`. When importing the GEOPM dashboard use the 
prometheus server running on `http://SERVER_NAME:PROMETHEUS_SERVER_PORT` as the datasource.

Step-G: Be sure to kill the prometheus and grafana servers after the configuration is

> compleed. If needed the PIDs for termination are printed by the `pbs_prometheus_launch.sh`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
completed. If needed the PIDs for termination are printed by the `pbs_prometheus_launch.sh`
```

Reviewer 4: change accounted for

file - `GEOPM_Report.grafana.dashboard.json`, in this directory, 
relies on `geopmexporter(1)` for its data source.

## Monitoring PBS jobs

The `geopmexporter(1)` is typically deployed system wide with either a systemd
service or as a kubernetes service.  This documentation is for an alternative
`geopmexporter(1)` deployment scenario where an unprivileged user of a PBS
managed system would like to monitor the compute resources granted to the user
only while they are allocated.  This methodology should not be applied for
system-wide monitoring by an administrator, but rather for job monitoring by an
end user of a PBS system where the geopmexporter is not deployed system-wide.

A script is provided called `pbs_prometheus_launch.sh` that can be used to
monitor jobs submitted to a PBS batch system.  The script runs the prometheus
and grafana server on the head node of a system, and will connect to
`geopmexporter(1)` clients running on the compute nodes of a user's job.

### Requirements

> A user installation of grafana and prometheus is required.  We recommend

Reviewer 3: Both grafana and prometheus are aviailable in spack.

There should be a section that discusses how to set things up that way as well.  At the very least a placeholder section that will be populated when we do the next release.

following the installation instructions
[here](https://grafana.com/grafana/download?platform=linux) to `wget` the
grafana archive for Linux.  The expanded archive is the `GRAFANA_DIR` provided
to the `pbs_prometheus_launch.sh` script CLI.  To install prometheus download
the archive for the latest stable Linux release from
[here](https://prometheus.io/download/).  The expanded archive is the
`PROMETHEUS_DIR` provided to the `pbs_prometheus_launch.sh` script CLI.

Until the `geopmexporter(1)` is available in a stable release, the user must
build and install a development snapshot of GEOPM.

> ```
> 
>     # Install latest development snapshot of GEOPM
>     GEOPM_DIR=/mnt/scratch/$USER/geopm-build
>     wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/geopm/geopm/refs/heads/dev/geopmdpy/install_user.sh
>     chmod a+x install_user.sh
>     ./install_user.sh --prefix=$GEOPM_DIR --enable-levelzero
> 
> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```bash
# Install latest development snapshot of GEOPM
GEOPM_DIR=/mnt/scratch/$USER/geopm-build
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/geopm/geopm/refs/heads/dev/geopmdpy/install_user.sh
chmod a+x install_user.sh
./install_user.sh --prefix=$GEOPM_DIR --enable-levelzero
```

All bash blocks should be formatted this way.

### Configure Grafana

Before deploying the GEOPM exporter for the first time, the grafana dashboard
must be configured using the Grafana web GUI.  This requires you to set the
administrator password for you Grafana instance with the `grafana-cli` tool
first.  This password can be used to login to the Grafana web server that is
started by the `pbs_prometheus_launch.sh` script on localhost port 8000.  Be
sure to kill the prometheus and grafana servers after the configuration is
complete: instructions to do so are printed by the script.

```
    # Set up GEOPM Dashboard
    PROMETHEUS_DIR=/mnt/scratch/$USER/prometheus-2.53.3.linux-amd64
    GRAFANA_DIR=/mnt/scratch/$USER/grafana-v11.3.1
     GRAFANA_ADMIN_PASSWORD=GRAFANA_ADMIN_PASSWORD # Choose your own password
    sed 's|http_port = [0-9]*|http_port = 8000|' -i $GRAFANA_DIR/conf/defaults.ini

    ./pbs_prometheus_launch.sh $PROMETHEUS_DIR $GRAFANA_DIR
    # Before using grafana for the first time set administrator password to
    # enable web login

>      $GRAFANA_DIR/bin/grafana-cli admin reset-admin-password $GRAFANA_ADMIN_PASSWORD

Author: this must be run inside of the $GRAFANA_DIR (as your working directory)

Reviewer 4: change already accounted for in the latest update
